.. _conformance:


Conformance and testing
=======================

Much of the behavior of ``webcolors`` is dictated by the relevant web
standards, which define the acceptable color formats, how to determine valid
values for each format and the values corresponding to defined color
names. Maintaining correct conversions and conformance to those standards is
crucial.

The source distribution of ``webcolors`` (the ``.tar.gz`` file you can download
from the Python Package Index) includes a ``tests/`` directory containing a
normal test suite as well as supplemental test files which perform more
comprehensive verification.


The normal test suite
---------------------

The normal test suite for ``webcolors`` aims for 100% coverage of code paths,
but does *not* aim for 100% coverage of possible color value inputs and
outputs. Instead, it uses a small number of test values to routinely exercise
various functions.

The test values used in most test functions are chosen to provide, where
applicable, at least one of each of the following types of values:

* An endpoint of the acceptable range of values (i.e., ``#ffffff`` and/or
  ``#000000`` for hexadecimal).

* A value beyond the high end of the acceptable range (i.e., greater than 255
  in an integer triplet, or greater than 100% for a percentage triplet).

* A value beyond the low end of the acceptable range (i.e., less than 0 in an
  integer triplet, or less than 0% for a percentage triplet).

* A "negative zero" value (-0 in an integer triplet, or -0% in a percentage
  triplet).

* An arbitrary value not from an endpoint of the acceptable range (usually
  ``#000080``, chosen because the author likes navy blue).

* A value which corresponds to a named color in CSS3/SVG but not in earlier
  standards (usually ``#daa520``, which is ``goldenrod`` in CSS3/SVG).

Since this covers the cases most likely to produce problems, this test suite
provides good basic confidence in the correctness of the tested functions. It
runs on every commit to the repository, and on every release tag. You can see
the results of test runs online `at GitHub
<https://github.com/ubernostrum/webcolors/actions/workflows/ci.yml/>`_.

However, the normal test suite cannot guarantee that the color definitions
included in ``webcolors`` correspond to those in the relevant standards, and
cannot provide guarantees of correct conversions for all possible values. For
that, additional tests are required.


.. _full-verification:

Full verification tests
-----------------------

These tests are contained in two files which are not executed during normal
test runs: ``tests/definitions.py`` and ``tests/full_colors.py``. They are not
run as part of the normal test suite, but are run prior to each release of
``webcolors``.


Verifying color definitions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``definitions.py`` test file verifies that the color definitions in
``webcolors`` are correct. It does this by downloading the relevant standards
documents as HTML, parsing out the color definitions in them, and comparing
them to the definitions in ``webcolors``. That consists of:

* Parsing out the names and hexadecimal values of the 16 named colors in the
  HTML 4 standard, and checking that the names and values in
  :data:`~webcolors.HTML4_NAMES_TO_HEX` match.

* Parsing out the names and hexadecimal values of the 17 named colors in the
  CSS2.1 standard, and checking that the names and values in
  :data:`~webcolors.CSS21_NAMES_TO_HEX` match.

* Parsing out the names and hexadecimal and integer values of the 147 named
  colors in the CSS3 color module (although the color set is taken from SVG,
  CSS3 provides both hexadecimal and integer values for them, while the SVG
  standard provides only integer values), and checking that the names and
  values in :data:`~webcolors.CSS3_NAMES_TO_HEX` match, and that
  :func:`~webcolors.name_to_rgb` returns the correct integer values.


Fully verifying correctness of conversions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `full_colors.py` test file exercises :func:`~webcolors.hex_to_rgb`,
:func:`~webcolors.rgb_to_hex`, :func:`~webcolors.rgb_to_rgb_percent` and
:func:`~webcolors.rgb_percent_to_rgb` as fully as is practical.

For conversions between hexadecimal and integer ``rgb()``, it generates all
16,777,216 possible color values for each format in order (starting at
``#000000`` and ``(0,0,0)`` and incrementing), and verifies that each one
converts to the corresponding value in the other format. Thus, it is possible
to be confident that ``webcolors`` provides correct conversions between all
possible color values in those formats.

Testing the correctness of conversion to and from percentage ``rgb()``,
however, is more difficult, and a full test is not provided, for two reasons:

1. Because percentage ``rgb()`` values can make use of floating-point values,
   and because standard floating-point types in most common programming
   languages (Python included) are inherently imprecise, exact verification is
   not possible.

2. The only rigorous definition of the format of a percentage value is in CSS2,
   `which declares a percentage to be
   <http://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/syndata.html#percentage-units>`_ "a `<number>`
   immediately followed by '%'". `The CSS2 definition of a number
   <http://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/syndata.html#value-def-number>`_ places no limit
   on the length past the decimal point, and appears to be declaring any real
   number as a valid value, though percentage triplets clip their inputs to the
   range 0.0-100.0. As the subset of reals in the range 0.0 to 100.0 is
   uncountably infinite, testing all legal values is not possible on current
   hardware in any reasonable amount of time.

Since precise correctness and completeness are not achievable, ``webcolors``
instead aims to achieve *consistency* in conversions. Specifically, the
``full_colors.py`` test generates all 16,777,216 integer ``rgb()`` triplets,
and for each such triplet `t` verifies that the following assertion holds:

.. code-block:: python

   t == rgb_percent_to_rgb(rgb_to_rgb_percent(t))


Running the tests
-----------------

The standard test runner for ``webcolors`` is `nox <https://nox.thea.codes/>`_,
which supports testing against multiple Python versions and executing a variety
of different test tasks. The source distribution of ``webcolors`` includes its
``noxfile.py`` file. To run the tests, install nox (``pip install nox``), then
download and unpack a git checkout or source package of ``webcolors``.

To run the normal test suite:

.. tab:: macOS/Linux/other Unix

   .. code-block:: shell

      python -m pip install nox
      python -m nox

.. tab:: Windows

   .. code-block:: shell

      py -m pip install nox
      py -m nox

This will attempt to test against each supported version of Python (for
``webcolors`` |release|, this is 3.8, 3.9, 3.10, 3.11, and 3.12), skipping any
which are missing on your machine. To test only against a specific version of
Python, use the ``--python`` flag and pass the version to test. For example, to
test on Python 3.10:

.. tab:: macOS/Linux/other Unix

   .. code-block:: shell

      python -m nox --python "3.10"

.. tab:: Windows

   .. code-block:: shell

      py -m nox --python "3.10"

To run the full verification tests for definition correctness and conversions,
specify the "release" test keyword instead (so named because these tests are
usually run only prior to a new release of ``webcolors``):

.. tab:: macOS/Linux/other Unix

   .. code-block:: shell

      python -m nox --keyword release

.. tab:: Windows

   .. code-block:: shell

      py -m nox --keyword release

Note that this requires an internet connection, and is CPU-intensive.
